Opinion: 2015 could see a return to modestly expansionist budgetsJohn McHaleUnder reasonable central growth projections, budgetary projections extended out to the end of the decade indicate that the most difficult phase should be complete by 2015. These projections assume full compliance with all fiscal rules. After 2015, the projections indicate that it should be feasible to have modest expansions in money terms instead of the contractionary budgets that we have become accustomed.While the scope for expenditure increases is still likely to be limited, it should be at least possible for public expenditure increases to keep track with inflation.Of course, huge uncertainty surrounds any such longer-term term projections. Growth could disappoint; new banking losses could emerge and fall on the State; the euro zone crisis could flare up again. But the path out of the crisis is slowly becoming visible.Budget 2014The Government has announced its intention to pursue a smaller nominal adjustment of €2.5 billion in Budget 2014 than the €3.1 billion originally planned. The main reason is that the promissory note deal allows the budget deficit targets as a share of GDP to be achieved with fewer measures.The Fiscal Council has argued that the preferred policy was to stick with the original plan. There are two main reasons. First, given the uncertainties surrounding growth, there remain significant doubts relating to the ability to meet the key 3 per cent deficit target for 2015 required for exit from the European Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). The existing buffer is eroded by the choice to do less than planned. It is true that growth disappointments could be accommodated by doing more than the €2 billion planned for Budget 2015. But such a reversal to a tougher budgetary policy would be a blow to confidence.Second, there have been gains in credibility hard-won through our success in delivering on what was promised. While I don’t want to exaggerate the loss from a relatively modest scaling back of what was planned, it is inevitable that there has been some sacrifice in credibility at a time when Ireland is seeking to restore full bond market access and negotiate a back-up official credit line.On the other hand, the €600 million reduction should boost growth in 2014 by about 0.2 per cent and lower the unemployment rate by about 0.1 per cent. It is also undeniable that people need whatever break they can get after six years of painful austerity measures.But neither can we forget that any extra borrowing next year will have to be repaid with interest. Even so, future growth could help with the later heavy lifting, and it should be easier to forego future tax reductions and expenditure increases than to bear hikes and cuts now.The choice of the adjustment figure for Budget 2014 has therefore been a difficult balancing act. The more important point is that the broader crisis-resolution strategy remains in place and is working.John McHale is Established Professor of Economics at NUI, Galway and chair of the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council .. We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .