Opinion: Universal health care is a laudable aim, but now is not the time to introduce itHow can it make sense to provide free GP care to healthy young children while denying those who struggle with chronic disease the care they need and deserve? Photograph: PAThe Government’s decision to offer free GP care to all children aged five and under in the recent budget has provoked a strong reaction. Those in favour praise the move as the first step in implementing a system of universal healthcare; for others it raises troubling issues around the principle of ensuring care is based primarily on patient need.In the current climate where medical cards are being precipitously taken away from people with established illness such as cancer and new applications for discretionary cards refused to patients with newly diagnosed motor neurone disease, the question must be asked: is it appropriate to offer free GP care to young children who do not have a chronic illness or whose parents have an income substantially above the qualifying limit used to determine medical card eligibility for the rest of the population?Add the Orwellian phrase “medical card probity” – used in the budget speech to describe an exercise to reduce medical card costs by €113 million – to the mix and it is clear the GP care policy change for children aged five and under has been made very much against the tide of cutting access to free medical care in the Republic.Having a medical card offers more than just free access to your GP and free medication (prescription charge excepted). It is the key to free care in hospital emergency departments.Without a full medical card you will not be eligible for medical equipment deemed essential for managing your illness. Medical cards give access to wheelchairs, specialist seating and other aids to independent living. And the original full medical card is needed to obtain these benefits: a “doctor-only” medical card covers the cost of seeing your family doctor and nothing else.As a measure of the inequities that already exist in the health system consider the following real cases: Adam is a six-year-old who was born with a hypoplastic left heart – a condition where the main pumping chamber of the heart is underdeveloped.Significant needsHe underwent life-saving open heart surgery but suffered a stroke following his operation. He is looked after at home by his parents, but has significant needs in terms of equipment, medication and emergency care. Adam has had a medical card for a number of years, with an expiry date of August 2014. However, his parents were shocked when his card was suddenly cancelled some weeks ago.Gemma is another six-year-old with a congenital, life-long condition. She has osteogenesis imperfecta type 3, a severe form of brittle bone disease which causes frequent fractures (necessitating regular visits to the emergency department) and which has inhibited normal growth.She requires regular treatment abroad and also has significant equipment needs. Her card expires next month and has been placed under review rather than being renewed automatically.. We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .