Opinion: Due to late arrival of competition in the market one company has the vast majority of older customersJames ReillyRecently, I announced changes to these credits and stamp duties, in order to ensure that health insurance continues to be subsidised for our most vulnerable patients. I am pleased that we were able to keep the stamp duty for cheaper plans unchanged at €290 per adult and €100 per child. This will help to ensure that the option of lower cost health insurance remains available.We have had to increase the stamp duty plans providing advanced cover (from €350 to €399 per adult and from €120 to €135 per child) to help target support where it is needed most – for older, more vulnerable patients who would otherwise not be able to afford health insurance. In effect, the stamp duty for advanced plans will increase by €49 for adults and €15 for children. This does not mean that each plan will increase by these amounts. It is up to the health insurers to decide their own pricing plans. Insurers can reduce their outgoings under the scheme by taking on a fairer share of older customers.There is plenty of evidence that this is not happening. For example, for those aged over 80, VHI holds 89 per cent of the market share in this age group. This is compared with only 6 per cent held by both Laya and Aviva . Similarly, in the 70-79 age group, VHI has 78 per cent of the market, compared to 12 per cent for Laya and 9 per cent for Aviva.I would also remind everyone again that insurers do not have to pass on the cost of the changes we have had to make. As I have said many times, they must look to their own cost base. I have commissioned an independent report on the high costs in the industry and I expect to receive it soon. I will continue to pursue all measures to drive down costs.Affordable protectionThe last thing we want is for health insurance to become a luxury that existing customers can’t afford. That is why we are considering a number of possibilities including lifetime community rating, where premiums rise depending on the age at which you first sign up for health insurance. This provides an incentive for younger generations to take out affordable protection at an early stage.We are making progress towards our ultimate goal – that single-tier, patient-centred, system of universal healthcare for all. But the maintenance of a healthy and functioning private health insurance market is an essential step in the transition to a market-based universal health insurance system. The changes made during the last week ensure that we continue to protect our fair system of community-rated health insurance, which we need now, and will continue to need as we move to a fairer and better health system in the future.Dr James Reilly is Minister for Health. We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .