Scaling the popularity stakesClimbing, in all its forms, has gone from being a tiny niche activity to being one of the country’s fastest-growing sports with thousands of participantsLucy Mitchell competing at the ODON Irish Lead Climbing Championship at Awesome Walls, Dublin on her way to becoming Senior Female Champion.  Photograph: John BanyardDavid Cussen competing at the ODON Irish Lead Climbing Championship at Awesome Walls, Dublin. Photograph: John BanyardDaragh O Connor competing at the ODON Irish Lead Climbing Championship at Awesome Walls, Dublin.  Photograph: John BanyardAndy Kelly competing at the ODON Irish Lead Climbing Championship at Awesome Walls, Dublin. Photograph: John BanyardPrevious ImageNext ImagePrevious ImagesMore ImagesHarry McGeeUp until about a handful of years ago, says Damien O’Sullivan, you might have got 50 or 60 people out climbing in Dublin on a weekend day, and perhaps as many more around the country.Nowadays, you will often get 500 or more. They’re either rock climbing in Dalkey or Glendalough or Fair Head in Co Antrim or Alladie in Co Clare; or bouldering in a myriad of sites around Co Wicklow; or using the growing number of indoor climbing and bouldering walls – of which the impressive Gravity in Inchicore and the tremendous Awesome Walls in Finglas are the latest and shiniest additions.Fastest-growing sportsVertical climbing has gone from being a tiny niche activity (with a small cohort of enthusiasts) to being one of the country’s fastest-growing sports with thousands of participants.O’Sullivan, the talent development officer of Mountaineering Ireland , is a climber himself and has witnessed its burgeoning popularity at first hand.It might not yet be the second most popular sporting activity, as it is in Austria, nor a national sport, as it in France, but Ireland has some of the best cliff-faces and crags for rock-climbing in the world, including the extraordinary and difficult cliffs of Fair Head.“I suppose the increase in popularity is a combination of a bunch of things. There has been a move towards more outdoor sports and less team sports. New facilities have been built like Awesome, Gravity and Play at Height [in Dingle]. Bouldering is becoming more popular. There is better gear, there are better mats and more opportunities,” says O’Sullivan.Bouldering is more technical climbing that is done without a rope and usually involves a “problem” that can be overcome in a few moves. The routes don’t go very high and protection from a fall is provided by a thick mat.Indoor and sports climbing involves using a rope, harness and tight-fitting rock shoes with pointed rubber soles. The climber clips the rope into bolted carabiners dotting the upward route during ascent. In outdoor traditional climbing, there are no bolts – climbers place nuts or injection-like camming devices into cracks and fissures in the rock as they progress upwards.O’Sullivan says the attractions of the sport are many. “It is a gender-neutral sport. It does not matter what age you are or what body type you have.”Brightest talentsThe proof of that was the ODON Irish Lead Climbing Championship held in Awesome Walls recently.One of the brightest talents is 16-year old Dominic Burns from Rosetta in Belfast who is ranked number one in the world for bouldering in his age group (a massive achievement considering that millions climb across the world). He came second in the senior competition to another amazing climber, Alex Waterhouse .. We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .